XCM Doc Restructure: Adding pages (#4559)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-xcm-transport.md

---
id: learn-xcm-transport
title: XCM Transport Methods (XCMP, HRMP, VMP)

> sidebar_label: XCM Transport Methods (XCMP, HRMP, VMP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: XCM Transport
```

description: Learn the various methods in which XCM messages can be propagated across networks.
keywords: [cross-consensus, XCM, XCMP, interoperability, communication]
slug: ../learn-xcm-transport
---

With the XCM format established, common patterns for protocols of these messages are needed.
{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} implements two message passing
protocols for acting on XCM messages between its constituent parachains.

There are three primary methods for message passing, one of which is under development:

1. XCMP (Cross-Chain Message Passing)
2. Horizontal Relay-routed Message Passing (HRMP/XCMP-lite)
3. VMP (Vertical Message Passing)

### XCMP (Cross-Chain Message Passing)

:::caution

> XCMP is currently under development and most cross-chain message passing uses HRMP channels for the
> time being.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XCMP is currently under development, and most of the cross-chain messages pass through HRMP channels for the
time being.
```
